---
title: Serching Protein Interactions in the IntAct database
authors:  Allegra Via 
based on: IntAct documentation and EMBL-EBI train online
minutes: 30
---

------------

> ## Learning Outcomes
> Learners will be able to:
> * use IntAct to find interaction partners of an input protein of interest
> * visualise the interaction network of an input protein 
> * download the results of their search 
> 
> ## The aim of this tutorial
> The aim of this tutorial is to give learners the chance to explore the IntAct database and practice searches.

------------
## Background 

> From Train online @ EMBL-EBI: [Protein interactions and their importance](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/online/course/protein-interactions-and-their-importance/molecular-interaction-databases-embl-ebi)
> Before starting this tutorial, do the following online quick tour @EMBL-EBI: [IntAct, Quick tour](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/online/courses/intact-quick-tour/)
> This quick tour should take about 30 min to complete. It provides a brief introduction to IntAct.

#### Protein-Protein Interactions and Molecular Interactions Databases
A good knowledge of the biological systems complexity needs a complete understanding of protein-protein interactions and their molecular machinery. Molecular interaction data can be generated by many different techniques and there is a huge amount of data and large-scale datasets of molecular interactions constantly published.
Therefore, numerous databases have been established in order to collect, archive, disseminate and manipulate molecular interaction data. The main purpose of these repositories is to capture molecular interaction data, to organise them in a structured format, which allows users to perform searches and bioinformatics analysis. Therefore, molecular interaction databases are key to the interpretation of cellular complexity.

#### IntAct Database
[IntAct] (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact) is a publicly available repository of molecular interactions. It is hosted by the European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) in Hinxton, UK, where it is maintained by a group of curators and developers. It collects molecular interaction data coming either from manually curated literature or from direct data depositions. Most of the data refer to protein-protein interactions, but interactions involving other types of molecules, such as small chemical compounds or nucleic acids, can also be found in IntAct.

At EMBL-EBI, IntAct is the main database for molecular interactions. There are other EMBL-EBI databases that also capture interaction information, the most prominent one being ChEMBL, which hosts a large collection of small molecule-protein/drug-target interactions.

IntAct is a member of the International Molecular Exchange (IMEx) Consortium - a group of major public interaction data providers whose goal is to share curation effort and standards, and exchange completed records on molecular interaction data. When you query data in IntAct you also access over 150 million interactions in a further 31 data resources via our PSICQUIC (Proteomics Standard Initiative Common QUery InterfaCe) service or a consistently annotated, non-redundant, experimentally determined subset from the IMEx Consortium.

The IntAct curation interface has been developed as a web-based platform in order to allow external curation teams to annotate data directly into the database.  All data can be searched, viewed and downloaded. Data can be accessed, through the IntAct ftp site, in PSI-MI XML and MITAB 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7 formats. Alternatively, the complete dataset can be downloaded directly from the website in RDF and XGMML formats. Data are also accessible through the PSICQUIC web service IMEx website. 

You can learn more about IntAct  in a separate course: [IntAct: Molecular Interactions at the EBI](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/online/course/intact-molecular-interactions-ebi).

IntAct and [MINT](https://mint.bio.uniroma2.it) databases are two of the largest databases (number of manuscripts curated and the number of non-redundant interactions). Both adopted the highest possible data quality standards. IntAct and MINT joined forces to create a single resource to improve curation and software development efforts and were founder members of the IMEx Consortium.

Data maintenance, and the PSICQUIC and IMEx web services are the responsibility of the IntAct team, while the curation effort is undertaken by both IntAct and MINT curators. 

### Searching IntAct

In this training session you will search the IntAct database. You will perform different searches, check the number of interaction evidences supporting each search, look for the experimental details of a specific interaction, and download data using different formats.

Go to the [IntAct website](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/).


#### Step1: Quick Search
In the quick search panel, it is possible to type: protein name, gene name, Accession Numbers, GO term, publication ID, authors name, experimental detection method, etc. 

In this exercise you will perform a simple search and look at your results in the IntAct viewer. 

You may perform the exercise below or alternatively, you may try a protein you are interested in. 

Open the [IntAct homepage](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact) homepage in a web browser. Type in the Quick Search textbox ‘MEKK1’ and click on the Search button.

**Q1: How many interactions (entries) can you find?**

Searching on a non-specific gene name will bring you up a mixed set of results. 

You can refine your search in one of the following ways:
1. submit a more specific query (e.g. either Q13233 or M3K1_HUMAN if you want to search for MEKK1 interactions in **Homo sapiens**);
2. use the the Filters at the top of the output page (e.g. set to Homo sapiens both "Interactor Species" and "Interaction Host Organism"
3. go back to the main page and click on Advanced Search button in the menu bar at the top of the page. Notice that the advanced search is not yet supported in this new website (May 2022), you will therefore be redirected to the former IntAct website upon clicking on the search button.

**Q2: How many interactions do you find by refining the search according to approaches 1 and 2?** 

Go to the detailed view of the MEKK1 (Q13233) / BRAF (P15056) interaction that has "Protein Kinase assay" as Interaction detection Method.

**Q3: Which of these proteins acts as enzyme in this reaction?** 

#### Step2: visualise interactions as a network
Type the PMID: 22014111 in the Quick search textbox. Only type in the Publication ID (22014111).
The interactions described in this paper will be displayed. 

**Q4: How many interactions can you find?**

Observe the interaction network and the 162 entries. 

**Q5: what type of network is it? What type of proteins are the network hubs?**

#### Step3: Download data

**Q6: Download all the PPIs associated to this PMID as XGMML format or MITAB 2.7 format.**

If you have time, you can also try the following: 

Search all the human PPIs present in IntAct using the quick or advanced search (see below).

**Q7: Export the interactions found as MITAB 2.7**

Have a look at the COVID-19 dataset and try to browse Intact for COVID-19 data. Apply some filters.
Try to understand what type of information you can extract from the results of this search. 

>#### Currently (May 2022) [advanced searches](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/legacy-intact/search) can be performed at the [legacy version of Intact](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/legacy-intact/). 
>If you have time, you may want to learn how to perform Advanced Searches:
>
>#### Step4: Refining your search using the Advanced Search
>
>Using the Molecular Interaction Query Language (MIQL), available from the search panel, it is possible to perform more complex queries. This will allow you to write complex queries.
>Example: To discover if there is any interaction available in the database between *Plasmodium falciparum* (isolate 3D7) and human proteins: a) Clear all previous searches b) Type ‘taxidA:36329 AND taxidB:9606’.

>Clicking on ```Advanced search``` and then on ```Show Advanced Fields``` (on the right of the Search textbox in the IntAct homepage) opens up the Advanced Search options. Here, you can specify one or more fields you wish to search in, and build a complex query as you progress. For example, you can clear the previous search and use the ```Show Advanced Fields``` to search for ‘organism’ = human AND ‘Interaction detection method’ = surface plasmon resonance.

>You can start with the first search (```Advanced search``` > ```Show Advanced Fields``` > organism > human > ```Add & Search```). In the result page, you can click on "Advanced" at the top right of the page. You will end up in a partially filled (with your initial search) Advanced search input page. Here, you can add further Advanced Fields options:

>```Advanced search``` > ```Show Advanced Fields``` > Interaction detection method > surface plasmon resonance > ```Add & Search```

>Read carefully "Search Tips" and have a look at the "MIQL syntax".

>**Q8: How many interactions can you see for ‘organism’ = human AND ‘Interaction detection method’ = two hybrid?** 

>**Q9: How many interactions do you see for P53_HUMAN AND ‘Interaction type’ = physical?** 

>**Q10: How many interactions do you see for ABL1_HUMAN AND interaction type = direct interaction?** 

>Go to the ```detailed view``` of the ABL1_HUMAN (P00519) / P41 (EBI-7094147) interaction that has isothermal titration calorimetry as “Interaction detection Method”: 

>**Q11: Which are the Interaction Parameters associated to this interaction?** 

>Go back to the interaction list of the previous search and go to the ```detailed view``` of the ABL1_HUMAN (P00519) / P41 (EBI-7094147) interaction that has X-ray crystallography as “Interaction detection Method". 

>**Q12: Which are the "Experimental Features" of this interaction for both interactors? Which binding site and which mutation(s)?**
>




